dot_claude/skills/refactoring/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: refactoring
description: Guide code refactoring using Martin Fowler's catalog of behavior-preserving transformations. Use during TDD REFACTOR phase, when code smells are detected (duplication, long methods, feature envy), when discussing structural improvements, or before behavioral changes (Tidy First).
---

# Refactoring Skill

Apply behavior-preserving transformations to improve code quality.

## Core Principle

> "Refactoring is a disciplined technique for restructuring an existing body of code, altering its internal structure without changing its external behavior." — Martin Fowler

## Refactoring Workflow

1. **Ensure tests pass** (you need a safety net)
2. **Identify ONE smell** to address
3. **Choose appropriate pattern** from `patterns.md`
4. **Apply mechanically** in small steps
5. **Run tests after each step**
6. **Commit when green**

## Safety Rules

- **Never refactor with failing tests**
- **One pattern at a time**
- **Commit after each successful refactor**
- **Revert immediately if tests fail**

Commit message:

docs(claude): expand refactoring skill scope to include tests
The original phrasing "improve code quality" could be misinterpreted
to exclude test code from refactoring discipline. During TDD's
REFACTOR phase, both production and test code need structural
improvements—tests accumulate technical debt through duplication,
unclear assertions, and brittle setup just like production code.

Making this explicit ensures tests receive the same refactoring
attention, aligned with the TDD workflow where GREEN phase often
leaves both implementation and test needing cleanup.

dot_claude/skills/refactoring/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: refactoring
description: Guide code refactoring using Martin Fowler's catalog of behavior-preserving transformations. Use during TDD REFACTOR phase, when code smells are detected (duplication, long methods, feature envy), when discussing structural improvements, or before behavioral changes (Tidy First).
---

# Refactoring Skill

Apply behavior-preserving transformations to improve quality of any codes, including tests.

## Core Principle

> "Refactoring is a disciplined technique for restructuring an existing body of code, altering its internal structure without changing its external behavior." — Martin Fowler

## Refactoring Workflow

1. **Ensure tests pass** (you need a safety net)
2. **Identify ONE smell** to address
3. **Choose appropriate pattern** from `patterns.md`
4. **Apply mechanically** in small steps
5. **Run tests after each step**
6. **Commit when green**

## Safety Rules

- **Never refactor with failing tests**
- **One pattern at a time**
- **Commit after each successful refactor**
- **Revert immediately if tests fail**
