dot_claude/skills/adr/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: adr
description: Manage Architecture Decision Records and ADR-aligned development. Use when user says "we should use", "let's go with", asks "why did we choose X?", implements a feature that may have an ADR, updates ADR status, or needs to check alignment with existing decisions.
---

# INSTRUCTIONS

Manage Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) throughout their lifecycle: read existing decisions, write new ones, and ensure development aligns with documented decisions.

- **Template**: See `template.md` for the MADR structure
- **Operations**: See `operations.md` for discovery, naming, status updates, and commit integration
- **Queries**: See `queries.md` for finding and reading existing ADRs

## Modes

### Read Mode
**Trigger**: "why did we choose X?", "what's our approach to Y?", "is there an ADR for Z?"

1. Discover ADR directory (see `operations.md`)
2. Search for relevant ADRs by keyword/topic
3. Summarize the decision and its rationale
4. Note if the ADR is active, deprecated, or superseded

### Write Mode
**Trigger**: "we should use", "let's go with", "I've decided to", trade-off discussions

1. Check for existing ADRs on the topic (may need to supersede)
2. Gather information through clarifying questions
3. Draft ADR using `template.md`
4. Save and commit (amend later if needed)

### ADR-Aligned Development Mode
**Trigger**: Implementing features, making architectural changes, deviating from existing patterns

1. **Before implementation**: Check for relevant ADRs
2. **During implementation**: Reference ADR in commits
3. **On completion**: Update ADR status (proposed → accepted)
4. **On deviation**: Create superseding ADR, deprecate old one with `_` prefix

## Quality Checklist

Before finalizing an ADR:

- [ ] Title clearly states the decision (not the problem)
- [ ] Context explains WHY this decision is needed now
- [ ] At least 2 options were genuinely considered
- [ ] Decision drivers link to actual project constraints
- [ ] Consequences include both positive AND negative impacts
- [ ] Confirmation section describes how to validate the decision

## Anti-Patterns

- **Decision without options**: Always document alternatives considered
- **Vague consequences**: Be specific about trade-offs
- **Missing "why"**: The ADR should answer "why this, why now"
- **Orphan ADRs**: Link to related ADRs when relevant
- **Stale ADRs**: Update status when implemented or superseded
- **Undocumented deviation**: If you deviate from an ADR, create a new one

## Reference

Based on [MADR - Markdown Architectural Decision Records](https://adr.github.io/madr/) (Version 4.0, 2024)

Commit message:

docs(claude): improve discoverability of multifile skill references
Enhanced SKILL.md file references to better describe supporting file
contents. When a skill extracts content to supporting files, the
main SKILL.md must clearly signal what's in each file.

- tidying: expanded descriptions for behavior-contract.md and
  context-boundaries.md to mention examples and context-specific rules
- adr: added deprecation workflow, MADR sections, and query types
  to the reference descriptions

Good references enable Claude to know WHEN to consult supporting
files without reading them first.

dot_claude/skills/adr/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: adr
description: Manage Architecture Decision Records and ADR-aligned development. Use when user says "we should use", "let's go with", asks "why did we choose X?", implements a feature that may have an ADR, updates ADR status, or needs to check alignment with existing decisions.
---

# INSTRUCTIONS

Manage Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) throughout their lifecycle: read existing decisions, write new ones, and ensure development aligns with documented decisions.

- **Template**: See `template.md` for the MADR structure (status, context, drivers, options, consequences)
- **Operations**: See `operations.md` for directory discovery, naming conventions, commit integration, deprecation (`_` prefix), and ADR-aligned development workflow
- **Queries**: See `queries.md` for finding ADRs by topic, status, or relationship

## Modes

### Read Mode
**Trigger**: "why did we choose X?", "what's our approach to Y?", "is there an ADR for Z?"

1. Discover ADR directory (see `operations.md`)
2. Search for relevant ADRs by keyword/topic
3. Summarize the decision and its rationale
4. Note if the ADR is active, deprecated, or superseded

### Write Mode
**Trigger**: "we should use", "let's go with", "I've decided to", trade-off discussions

1. Check for existing ADRs on the topic (may need to supersede)
2. Gather information through clarifying questions
3. Draft ADR using `template.md`
4. Save and commit (amend later if needed)

### ADR-Aligned Development Mode
**Trigger**: Implementing features, making architectural changes, deviating from existing patterns

1. **Before implementation**: Check for relevant ADRs
2. **During implementation**: Reference ADR in commits
3. **On completion**: Update ADR status (proposed → accepted)
4. **On deviation**: Create superseding ADR, deprecate old one with `_` prefix

## Quality Checklist

Before finalizing an ADR:

- [ ] Title clearly states the decision (not the problem)
- [ ] Context explains WHY this decision is needed now
- [ ] At least 2 options were genuinely considered
- [ ] Decision drivers link to actual project constraints
- [ ] Consequences include both positive AND negative impacts
- [ ] Confirmation section describes how to validate the decision

## Anti-Patterns

- **Decision without options**: Always document alternatives considered
- **Vague consequences**: Be specific about trade-offs
- **Missing "why"**: The ADR should answer "why this, why now"
- **Orphan ADRs**: Link to related ADRs when relevant
- **Stale ADRs**: Update status when implemented or superseded
- **Undocumented deviation**: If you deviate from an ADR, create a new one

## Reference

Based on [MADR - Markdown Architectural Decision Records](https://adr.github.io/madr/) (Version 4.0, 2024)
