dot_claude/rules/claude-config-maintenance.md, before:

---
paths: "**/{.,dot_}claude/**"
---

# Claude Code Configuration Maintenance Guide

When creating or modifying Claude Code configuration files, follow these context-optimization principles.

## Configuration Selection Framework

Choose configuration type based on **when context should load** and **how context should be shared**:

| Type        | Trigger      | Context |
|-------------|--------------|---------|
| `CLAUDE.md` | Startup      | Shared, always loaded |
| `rules/`    | Startup/Path | Shared, lazy if paths specified |
| `commands/` | User         | Shared, on invocation |
| `skills/`   | Auto         | Shared, description only until triggered |
| `agents/`   | Auto/User    | Isolated, returns results only |

## Anti-Patterns to Avoid

1. **Context bloat in CLAUDE.md**: Move task-specific procedures to slash commands
2. **Duplicated content**: If skill and command overlap, have skill invoke the command
3. **Shared rules in multiple agents**: Extract to CLAUDE.md (always-needed) or skill (conditional)
4. **Heavyweight tasks in main context**: Use subagent when trial-and-error would pollute context
5. **User-level path rules leaking**: Path-filtered rules at user level may apply unintentionally (e.g., `*.ts` frontend rules activating in CLI projects)—prefer skills/commands for user-level task-specific guidance

## Best Practices Examples

### Skills + Commands Integration Pattern

For tasks needing both auto-detection AND manual invocation:

```yaml
---
# skills/git-commit/SKILL.md
name: git-commit
description: Stage meaningful diffs and create commits with WHY-focused messages. Use when agent needs to commit code changes.
---

Use `/git:commit` slash command to stage meaningful diffs and create commits with WHY-focused messages.
```

Benefits:
- Auto-triggers when Claude detects commit intent
- Allows explicit `/git:commit` for manual control
- Eliminates duplication between skill and command

### Path-specific Rules

To lazy load rules that should only apply to certain file paths.
Use glob patterns to specify paths:

```yaml
---
paths: "{src,lib}/**/*.ts, tests/**/*.test.ts"
---
```

## Refactoring Checklist

When reviewing configurations:

- [ ] Is CLAUDE.md content truly always-needed? Move conditional content elsewhere
- [ ] Are there duplications between skills and commands? Consolidate
- [ ] Would a subagent's isolated context benefit this task?
- [ ] Is the skill description specific enough for auto-discovery?
- [ ] Are commands self-contained without requiring other context?
- [ ] Are user-level path rules leaking into unintended project types?

Commit message:

docs(claude): clarify when to use agents vs skills
The config framework table showed context isolation differences but
didn't explain when isolation is beneficial. Users could see that
agents are isolated but not understand when to prefer isolation over
shared context. Added decision criteria with concrete examples to
help users choose between agents (exploratory/trial-and-error) and
skills (deterministic workflows).

dot_claude/rules/claude-config-maintenance.md, after:

---
paths: "**/{.,dot_}claude/**"
---

# Claude Code Configuration Maintenance Guide

When creating or modifying Claude Code configuration files, follow these context-optimization principles.

## Configuration Selection Framework

Choose configuration type based on **when context should load** and **how context should be shared**:

| Type        | Trigger      | Context |
|-------------|--------------|---------|
| `CLAUDE.md` | Startup      | Shared, always loaded |
| `rules/`    | Startup/Path | Shared, lazy if paths specified |
| `commands/` | User         | Shared, on invocation |
| `skills/`   | Auto         | Shared, description only until triggered |
| `agents/`   | Auto/User    | Isolated, returns results only |

## Anti-Patterns to Avoid

1. **Context bloat in CLAUDE.md**: Move task-specific procedures to slash commands
2. **Duplicated content**: If skill and command overlap, have skill invoke the command
3. **Shared rules in multiple agents**: Extract to CLAUDE.md (always-needed) or skill (conditional)
4. **Heavyweight tasks in main context**: Use subagent when trial-and-error would pollute context
5. **User-level path rules leaking**: Path-filtered rules at user level may apply unintentionally (e.g., `*.ts` frontend rules activating in CLI projects)—prefer skills/commands for user-level task-specific guidance

## Best Practices Examples

### Skills + Commands Integration Pattern

For tasks needing both auto-detection AND manual invocation:

```yaml
---
# skills/git-commit/SKILL.md
name: git-commit
description: Stage meaningful diffs and create commits with WHY-focused messages. Use when agent needs to commit code changes.
---

Use `/git:commit` slash command to stage meaningful diffs and create commits with WHY-focused messages.
```

Benefits:
- Auto-triggers when Claude detects commit intent
- Allows explicit `/git:commit` for manual control
- Eliminates duplication between skill and command

### Agents vs Skills: Choosing Context Isolation

Both can auto-trigger, but they differ in **context sharing**:

| Aspect | Skills | Agents |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Context | Shared with main conversation | Isolated subprocess |
| Results | Full context visible | Only final result returned |
| Best for | Deterministic workflows | Exploratory/trial-and-error tasks |

**Use skills when:**
- The workflow is predictable and benefits from shared context
- Intermediate steps inform subsequent decisions in the conversation
- You want the user to see the full process

**Use agents when:**
- The task involves exploration, debugging, or multiple attempts
- Failed attempts would pollute the main context
- The task is heavyweight and the user only needs the final result

Example: A "find files" task that may require trying multiple glob patterns should use an agent—failed searches won't clutter the conversation. A "commit changes" workflow should use a skill—the user benefits from seeing staged files and commit reasoning.

### Path-specific Rules

To lazy load rules that should only apply to certain file paths.
Use glob patterns to specify paths:

```yaml
---
paths: "{src,lib}/**/*.ts, tests/**/*.test.ts"
---
```

## Refactoring Checklist

When reviewing configurations:

- [ ] Is CLAUDE.md content truly always-needed? Move conditional content elsewhere
- [ ] Are there duplications between skills and commands? Consolidate
- [ ] Would a subagent's isolated context benefit this task?
- [ ] Is the skill description specific enough for auto-discovery?
- [ ] Are commands self-contained without requiring other context?
- [ ] Are user-level path rules leaking into unintended project types?
