dot_claude/skills/tidying/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: tidying
description: Guide structural code improvements using Kent Beck's Tidy First methodology. Use when seeing messy code, before making behavioral changes, after completing features, or discussing when to clean up code.
---

# INSTRUCTIONS

Apply Kent Beck's "Tidy First?" philosophy: small, safe structural changes that improve code without changing behavior. Tidying is separate from feature work and gets its own commits.

## Core Principle

> "Tidying is a special kind of refactoring... tidying is small, and you never need to tidy."

Tidyings are:
- **Small**: Minutes, not hours
- **Safe**: Structure only, no behavior change
- **Optional**: You choose when (or if) to tidy
- **Separate**: Own commits, distinct from behavioral changes

## When to Tidy: The Three Timings

### Tidy First (Before Behavior Change)
**Trigger**: You need to change code that's hard to understand or modify

Use when:
- Reading code takes longer than it should
- The change you need to make would be simpler if code were cleaner
- Coupling makes the change risky

```
/tidy:first → structural improvements → /git:commit (refactor:)
           → now make behavioral change → /git:commit (feat:/fix:)
```

### Tidy After (After Behavior Change)
**Trigger**: You just finished a feature and see improvement opportunities

Use when:
- The working code revealed better structure possibilities
- You added duplication to make tests pass (TDD GREEN phase)
- You now understand the domain better

```
behavioral change → /git:commit (feat:/fix:)
                 → /tidy:after → cleanup → /git:commit (refactor:)
```

### Tidy Later (Add to Backlog)
**Trigger**: Tidying would take too long or distract from current work

Use when:
- The tidying is substantial (more than a few minutes)
- You're in flow on something else
- The code works and tidying can wait

```
Note the opportunity → add to backlog/TODO → continue current work
```

## Tidying Catalog

Small, safe structural improvements:

| Tidying | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Guard Clauses** | Replace nested conditionals with early returns |
| **Dead Code** | Remove unused code (don't comment out—delete) |
| **Normalize Symmetries** | Make similar code look similar |
| **Extract Helper** | Pull out a chunk that does one thing |
| **Inline** | Remove unhelpful abstraction |
| **Rename** | Make names reveal intent |
| **Reorder** | Put related code together |
| **Chunk Statements** | Add blank lines to group related statements |
| **Explaining Variable** | Replace complex expression with named variable |
| **Explaining Constant** | Replace magic number/string with named constant |

## Decision Framework

When you encounter messy code, ask:

```
1. Does this code need to change for my current task?
   No  → Tidy Later (or never)
   Yes → Continue to 2

2. Would tidying make my change easier/safer?
   No  → Make behavioral change, then consider Tidy After
   Yes → Continue to 3

3. Is the tidying small (< 15 minutes)?
   No  → Tidy Later, make behavioral change anyway
   Yes → Tidy First, then make behavioral change
```

## Integration with TDD

Tidying complements TDD's REFACTOR phase:

- **TDD REFACTOR**: Remove duplication introduced during RED→GREEN
- **Tidy First/After**: Broader structural improvements, not tied to a specific test

When using TDD:
1. `/tdd:red` → `/tdd:green` → `/tdd:refactor` (remove test-code duplication)
2. Optionally: `/tidy:after` for broader cleanup
3. Repeat

## Commit Discipline

- **Every tidying gets its own commit**: `refactor: <what you tidied>`
- **Never mix tidying with behavioral changes**: Separate commits
- **Small commits**: One tidying per commit when possible

This separation:
- Makes code review easier
- Enables safe reverts
- Documents intent clearly

## Anti-Patterns

| Anti-Pattern | Problem | Instead |
|--------------|---------|---------|
| Big Bang Refactor | Risky, hard to review | Many small tidyings |
| Tidying + Feature | Obscures both changes | Separate commits |
| Speculative Tidying | Waste if code changes | Tidy what you're touching |
| Comment-Out Code | Creates noise | Delete it (git has history) |
| Tidying Forever | Procrastination | Time-box, then ship |

## Reference

Based on: *Tidy First?* by Kent Beck (2023) - A practical guide to when and how to make structural improvements to code.

Commit message:

docs(claude): add anti-DRY guidance to tidying skill
The tidying catalog includes both "Extract Helper" and "Inline"
tidyings but lacked guidance on when to choose between them. This
addition prevents premature abstraction by providing clear criteria
for when repetition is preferable to abstraction—aligning with Kent
Beck's principle that tidying tools are optional, not mandatory.

dot_claude/skills/tidying/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: tidying
description: Guide structural code improvements using Kent Beck's Tidy First methodology. Use when seeing messy code, before making behavioral changes, after completing features, or discussing when to clean up code.
---

# INSTRUCTIONS

Apply Kent Beck's "Tidy First?" philosophy: small, safe structural changes that improve code without changing behavior. Tidying is separate from feature work and gets its own commits.

## Core Principle

> "Tidying is a special kind of refactoring... tidying is small, and you never need to tidy."

Tidyings are:
- **Small**: Minutes, not hours
- **Safe**: Structure only, no behavior change
- **Optional**: You choose when (or if) to tidy
- **Separate**: Own commits, distinct from behavioral changes

## When to Tidy: The Three Timings

### Tidy First (Before Behavior Change)
**Trigger**: You need to change code that's hard to understand or modify

Use when:
- Reading code takes longer than it should
- The change you need to make would be simpler if code were cleaner
- Coupling makes the change risky

```
/tidy:first → structural improvements → /git:commit (refactor:)
           → now make behavioral change → /git:commit (feat:/fix:)
```

### Tidy After (After Behavior Change)
**Trigger**: You just finished a feature and see improvement opportunities

Use when:
- The working code revealed better structure possibilities
- You added duplication to make tests pass (TDD GREEN phase)
- You now understand the domain better

```
behavioral change → /git:commit (feat:/fix:)
                 → /tidy:after → cleanup → /git:commit (refactor:)
```

### Tidy Later (Add to Backlog)
**Trigger**: Tidying would take too long or distract from current work

Use when:
- The tidying is substantial (more than a few minutes)
- You're in flow on something else
- The code works and tidying can wait

```
Note the opportunity → add to backlog/TODO → continue current work
```

## Tidying Catalog

Small, safe structural improvements:

| Tidying | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Guard Clauses** | Replace nested conditionals with early returns |
| **Dead Code** | Remove unused code (don't comment out—delete) |
| **Normalize Symmetries** | Make similar code look similar |
| **Extract Helper** | Pull out a chunk that does one thing |
| **Inline** | Remove unhelpful abstraction |
| **Rename** | Make names reveal intent |
| **Reorder** | Put related code together |
| **Chunk Statements** | Add blank lines to group related statements |
| **Explaining Variable** | Replace complex expression with named variable |
| **Explaining Constant** | Replace magic number/string with named constant |

## Decision Framework

When you encounter messy code, ask:

```
1. Does this code need to change for my current task?
   No  → Tidy Later (or never)
   Yes → Continue to 2

2. Would tidying make my change easier/safer?
   No  → Make behavioral change, then consider Tidy After
   Yes → Continue to 3

3. Is the tidying small (< 15 minutes)?
   No  → Tidy Later, make behavioral change anyway
   Yes → Tidy First, then make behavioral change
```

## Integration with TDD

Tidying complements TDD's REFACTOR phase:

- **TDD REFACTOR**: Remove duplication introduced during RED→GREEN
- **Tidy First/After**: Broader structural improvements, not tied to a specific test

When using TDD:
1. `/tdd:red` → `/tdd:green` → `/tdd:refactor` (remove test-code duplication)
2. Optionally: `/tidy:after` for broader cleanup
3. Repeat

## Commit Discipline

- **Every tidying gets its own commit**: `refactor: <what you tidied>`
- **Never mix tidying with behavioral changes**: Separate commits
- **Small commits**: One tidying per commit when possible

This separation:
- Makes code review easier
- Enables safe reverts
- Documents intent clearly

## Anti-Patterns

| Anti-Pattern | Problem | Instead |
|--------------|---------|---------|
| Big Bang Refactor | Risky, hard to review | Many small tidyings |
| Tidying + Feature | Obscures both changes | Separate commits |
| Speculative Tidying | Waste if code changes | Tidy what you're touching |
| Comment-Out Code | Creates noise | Delete it (git has history) |
| Tidying Forever | Procrastination | Time-box, then ship |
| Excessive DRY | Premature abstraction | Keep simple patterns inline |

### When NOT to DRY

Not all repetition needs abstraction. Keep code inline when:

- **The pattern is simple and self-explanatory** (e.g., `vec![]`, `None`, error returns)
- **Abstraction adds indirection without clarity** (helper name doesn't help understanding)
- **The repetitions might evolve differently** (different error messages, future divergence)
- **grep/search is easier with inline code** (debugging, code review)
- **The "abstraction" would just be wrapping** (no logic, just constructor calls)

> "Duplication is far cheaper than the wrong abstraction." — Sandi Metz

**Rule of thumb**: If extracting a helper doesn't make the code *significantly* easier to understand or change, leave it inline. Three copies of `return Ok(None)` is fine.

## Reference

Based on: *Tidy First?* by Kent Beck (2023) - A practical guide to when and how to make structural improvements to code.
