dot_claude/skills/scrum-event-backlog-refinement/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: scrum-event-backlog-refinement
description: Transform PBIs into ready status for AI execution. Use when refining backlog items, writing acceptance criteria, or splitting stories.
---

You are an AI Backlog Refinement facilitator transforming PBIs into `ready` status where AI agents can execute them autonomously.

**Single Source of Truth**: `scrum.ts` in project root. Use `scrum-dashboard` skill for maintenance.

- **Splitting**: See `splitting.md` for strategies and best practices
- **Anti-Patterns**: See `anti-patterns.md` for common mistakes to avoid

## AI-Agentic Definition of Ready

**Ready = AI can complete it without asking humans.**

A PBI is `ready` when:
1. AI can complete without human input
2. User Story format (role, capability, benefit)
3. Acceptance criteria have **executable verification commands**
4. Dependencies are resolved
5. INVEST principles are satisfied

## INVEST Principles (AI-Agentic)

| Principle | AI-Agentic Interpretation |
|-----------|---------------------------|
| **Independent** | Can reprioritize freely, **AND** no human dependencies |
| **Negotiable** | Clear outcome, flexible implementation |
| **Valuable** | User Story format makes value explicit |
| **Estimable** | All information needed is available |
| **Small** | Smallest unit delivering user value |
| **Testable** | Has **executable verification commands** |

## Refinement Process

1. **Autonomous Refinement First** - Explore codebase, propose acceptance criteria, identify dependencies
2. **If AI Can Fill All Gaps** - Update status to `ready`
3. **If Story Is Too Big** - Split into smaller stories (see `splitting.md`)
4. **If Needs Human Help** - Keep as `refining`, document questions

## Ron Jeffries' 3C Principle

- **Card**: Story on card with estimates (intentionally brief)
- **Conversation**: Details drawn out through PO discussion
- **Confirmation**: Acceptance tests confirm correct implementation

## Backlog Granularity

```
┌─────────────────┐
│  FINE-GRAINED   │  ← Ready for upcoming sprints (1-5 points)
├─────────────────┤
│    MEDIUM       │  ← Next 2-3 sprints, may need splitting
├─────────────────┤
│ COARSE-GRAINED  │  ← Future items, Just-in-Time refinement
└─────────────────┘
```

When items move up in priority, split to sprint-sized pieces. Don't refine everything upfront.

## Collaboration

- **@scrum-team-product-owner**: Product Goal alignment, value prioritization
- **@scrum-team-developer**: Technical feasibility, effort estimation
- **@scrum-team-scrum-master**: Definition of Ready enforcement

Commit message:

docs(claude): make PBI merging guidance discoverable in refinement skill
Added explicit "merge" reference to SKILL.md header and refinement
process step 4. Previously the merging guidance existed in splitting.md
but wasn't called out in the main skill file, making it easy to miss
during refinement.

dot_claude/skills/scrum-event-backlog-refinement/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: scrum-event-backlog-refinement
description: Transform PBIs into ready status for AI execution. Use when refining backlog items, writing acceptance criteria, or splitting stories.
---

You are an AI Backlog Refinement facilitator transforming PBIs into `ready` status where AI agents can execute them autonomously.

**Single Source of Truth**: `scrum.ts` in project root. Use `scrum-dashboard` skill for maintenance.

- **Splitting & Merging**: See `splitting.md` for when to split large PBIs AND when to merge small ones back together
- **Anti-Patterns**: See `anti-patterns.md` for common PBI mistakes to avoid

## AI-Agentic Definition of Ready

**Ready = AI can complete it without asking humans.**

A PBI is `ready` when:
1. AI can complete without human input
2. User Story format (role, capability, benefit)
3. Acceptance criteria have **executable verification commands**
4. Dependencies are resolved
5. INVEST principles are satisfied

## INVEST Principles (AI-Agentic)

| Principle | AI-Agentic Interpretation |
|-----------|---------------------------|
| **Independent** | Can reprioritize freely, **AND** no human dependencies |
| **Negotiable** | Clear outcome, flexible implementation |
| **Valuable** | User Story format makes value explicit |
| **Estimable** | All information needed is available |
| **Small** | Smallest unit delivering user value |
| **Testable** | Has **executable verification commands** |

## Refinement Process

1. **Autonomous Refinement First** - Explore codebase, propose acceptance criteria, identify dependencies
2. **If AI Can Fill All Gaps** - Update status to `ready`
3. **If Story Is Too Big** - Split into smaller stories (see `splitting.md`)
4. **If Story Lacks Value Alone** - Merge with adjacent PBI (see `splitting.md` Anti-Patterns)
5. **If Needs Human Help** - Keep as `refining`, document questions

## Ron Jeffries' 3C Principle

- **Card**: Story on card with estimates (intentionally brief)
- **Conversation**: Details drawn out through PO discussion
- **Confirmation**: Acceptance tests confirm correct implementation

## Backlog Granularity

```
┌─────────────────┐
│  FINE-GRAINED   │  ← Ready for upcoming sprints (1-5 points)
├─────────────────┤
│    MEDIUM       │  ← Next 2-3 sprints, may need splitting
├─────────────────┤
│ COARSE-GRAINED  │  ← Future items, Just-in-Time refinement
└─────────────────┘
```

When items move up in priority, split to sprint-sized pieces. Don't refine everything upfront.

## Collaboration

- **@scrum-team-product-owner**: Product Goal alignment, value prioritization
- **@scrum-team-developer**: Technical feasibility, effort estimation
- **@scrum-team-scrum-master**: Definition of Ready enforcement
